Proposal for multi-cluster network policies (#198)
submariner-io/enhancements: coastguard/clustersetnetworkpolicy.md

# ClusterSetNetworkPolicy: An Approach to Multi-Cluster Network Policy

Epic: [Multi cluster network policies](https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/issues/176)

## Summary

Kubernetes provides a mechanism for policing network access to pods - the [NetworkPolicy].
The default mechanism allows specifying ingress and egress traffic rules for a set of peer pods (determined by a selector).
A user could define network policies to allow traffic across the clusterset, by specifying peers using "ip blocks",
but it would be impossible to use more abstract selectors to identify peers, as each cluster can only account for its own resources.

> We propose a new `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy` CRD for specifying multi cluster network policies.

Reviewer: I hope we will have option to enable/disable this feature similar to "service-discovery"?

The CRD will have the same structure and fields as the default Kubernetes `NetworkPolicy`,
with additional fields that are relevant to the clusterset.
Each such policy will be translated by the local CoastGuard controller to one (or more) `NetworkPolicy` capable of allowing remote traffic.
These local policies will be updated by the controller in response to any change in the original `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy` or any remote
pod or namespace that are relevant to the policy.

## Proposal

### Problem Definition

> Kubernetes provides a mechanism for policing network access to pods - the [NetworkPolicy].
> The default mechanism allows specifying ingress and egress traffic rules for a set of peer pods (determined by a selector).
> The source and destination peer can be either simple IP CIDRs, or a more user friendly abstraction which allows specifying pods or

Reviewer 2: L23-24 are a duplicate of L7-8.

```suggestion
The source and destination peers associated with a [NetworkPolicy] can be either simple IP CIDRs, or a more user friendly abstraction which allows specifying pods or
```

Author: L7-L10 is a summary of this entire section, some sentences are taken as is and some are shortened.
If anything, we can perhaps shorten the summary some more, but not this section.

but it would be impossible to use more abstract selectors to identify peers, as each cluster can only account for its own resources.

What we should strive to solve, then, is the ability for users to define network policies for east-west traffic in a clusterset,
while allowing them to use higher level abstractions for defining the policy peers.

### Design Limitations

#### CNI Agnosticity

Submariner aims to be as CNI agnostic as possible, and as such tries to interfere as little as possible with the underlying CNI.
As such, we have a limited capacity to transmute the network traffic (e.g. we can't plant any additional metadata inside a packet).

#### NetworkPolicy Interoperability

As a clusterset implementation, we would still need to be aware of the possibility of localized single-cluster network policies.
As such, we should not interfere with any such policies, should they be defined.
Since these policies could inherently disallow inter-cluster traffic,
our design and implementation should strive to complement them by adding support for such traffic.

#### Pod IP Preservation

> For all practical applications of this solution, we would need to preserve the source IP in the packet.
> Either by avoiding any NAT on the source cluster, or by utilizing a solution such as an overlay network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all practical applications of this solution, we would need to preserve the source IP in the packet 
either by avoiding any NAT on the source cluster, or by utilizing a solution such as an overlay network.
```

We would need to understand how this works with Globalnet v2 (if it's at all possible).

> ### Design Tenets

Reviewer 3: Does deliver the multi-cluster network policy as a stand-alone product is one of the requirements?

#### Broker Centric Data Sharing

As we're running in the Submariner ecosystem, it makes sense to share any data we need to share via the broker.
This has the following benefits (and more that aren't listed):

> * Debug-ability - users can see and query the data on the broker with ease to trace any problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Debuggability - users can see and query the data on the broker with ease to trace any problems.
```

* Standardized clients - we have standardized Kubernetes clients generated, with all the common features (selectors, etc).
* Integrated RBAC and authentication - Kubernetes takes care of this aspect for us as well.

#### Connectivity Decoupling

> We should strive to decouple the design & implementation from the underlying connectivity,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We should strive to decouple the design and implementation from the underlying connectivity,
```

> building on top of that fact that connectivity exists but not counting on it to be implemented in some certain way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
building on top of the fact that connectivity exists but not counting on it to be implemented in some certain way.
```

This would help our solution to be more robust and versatile.

#### Solution Scope

> * We aim to solve the problem of having clusterset aware network policies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We aim to solve the problem of having clusterset-aware network policies.
```

* We're not trying to provide a revolutionary approach,
  but rather an evolutionary approach that expands the base Kubernetes network policy concept.
* We aim for a good enough solution, but not a perfect solution encompassing every possible use case and edge case.

## Design Details

### ClusterSetNetworkPolicy CRD

A new `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy` CRD will be defined for specifying multi cluster network policies.
The CRD will be namespace scoped (same as the Kubernetes NetworkPolicy resource).
The CRD will have the same structure and fields as the default Kubernetes [NetworkPolicy],
with additional fields that are relevant to the clusterset.

The policies are local to the cluster, meaning they affect only the pods they are targeting on that cluster.
If users want, they can create the same policy across different clusters manually.
In the future, we may consider making policies global (or adding such a capability via a new CRD),
allowing the users to create the policy once, and the system will take care of distributing it.

Each such policy will be translated by the local CoastGuard controller to one (or more) `NetworkPolicy` where:

* Local peers are using the same selector.

> * Remote peers (pods) are identified using an `ipBlock` with a `\32` CIDR.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Local peers use the selector defined in the `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy` CR.
* Remote peers (pods) are identified using an `ipBlock` with a `/32` CIDR.
```

> * Remote peers (pods) are identified using an `ipBlock` with a `/32` CIDR.

Reviewer: I hope that the initial implementation only supports IPv4 addresses. Please add a corresponding note.

> These local policies will be updated by the controller in response to any change in the original `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy` or any remote

Reviewer 4: Will they have an owner ref pointing to the `ClusterSetNetworkPolicy`?

Author: We will probably use metadata label for that, but could possibly use other means, I think it's an implementation detail though

These CRDs would be namespace-scoped but the namespace it's in will be a system set namespace (e.g. submariner-operator).
These CRDs will be synchronized via the broker.

Each cluster will track its own pods and namespaces and keep them updated on each change in their lifecycle:

* When a pod/namespace is created, create a corresponding `RemotePod`/`RemoteNamespace`.
* When a pod/namespace is updated, update the corresponding `RemotePod`/`RemoteNamespace`.
* When a pod/namespace is deleted, delete the corresponding `RemotePod`/`RemoteNamespace`.

The advantage of this approach is that it's quite simple for each cluster to track and generate these CRs,
and each consuming cluster will use them for the actual implementation.
A disadvantage of this approach is that we'll be tracking every pod on every cluster, even if they don't match any selector.
This can be mitigated somewhat by having the source cluster track only pods/namespaces that match relevant selectors.

##### Proposed RemotePod CR Structure

```yaml
apiVersion: submariner.io/v1alpha1
kind: RemotePod
metadata:
  labels: <map string -> string>

>   name: <string>

Reviewer: For every pod in the remote cluster will we have an RemotePod object representing that pod in the local cluster?

I know its an implementation detail, but just to understand, may i know how the objects would be named to avoid any collision?

  namespace: <string>
spec:
  clusterID: <string>
  podIPs: <list of strings>
  remoteNamespace: <string>
```

##### Proposed RemoteNamespace CR Structure

```yaml
apiVersion: submariner.io/v1alpha1
kind: RemoteNamespace
metadata:
  labels: <map string -> string>
  name: <string>
  namespace: <string>
spec:
  clusterID: <string>
```

### Pros

The advantages of this proposal are:

* A similar CRD structure would be more familiar to existing Kubernetes users.
* Translating the structure to vanilla Kubernetes `NetworkPolicy` objects should be straightforward.
* Not interfering with any existing vanilla `NetworkPolicy` resources.

> * The cluster's CNI takes carte of the actual implementation details of the policy enforcement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The cluster's CNI takes care of the actual implementation details of the policy enforcement.
```
